---
title: If HTTP is stateless, how come I'm still logged into my email?
subtitle: The answer sounds yummy,
layout: default
date: 2024-12-19
keywords: networking
published: true
---

In my post about [REST APIs](/_posts/2024-12-18-cookies.md), I mentioned that HTTP is stateless.

Then, how come when you log into your Gmail account, close the tab, and then navigate to Gmail again, you're somehow 
still logged in? How come when you add 10 items to your Aritzia shopping cart (this is probably just a me problem), and 
then you add another 20 items (again, I have a shopping problem), the cart still contains the previous 10 items?

# The answer is cookies. Yum?
Cookies are pieces of data stored in your browser. 

When I make a request to add an item to my Aritzia shopping cart from my browser, the server sends a response with a `Set-Cookie` header.
This header instructs the browser to store a new cookie with a **key-value** pair. Once stored, the cookie is sent along 
with subsequent HTTP requests to the same server, allowing the server to recognize me and persist my clothing choices 
across multiple requests.

## Each cookie is a key-value pair.
An example is `darkmode=true`, a cookie in which the key is `darkmode` and the value is `true`.

It would be disastrous if every cookie was sent in every request I made from my browser. I wouldn't want Aritzia to have
my Gmail login info and vice-versa, for example. Therefore, cookies have attributes that help the browser determine which
cookies should be attached to which request. Some of these attributes are:

- `Domain`: Specifies the domain for which the cookie is valid. Cookies are only sent to the server if the request is 
made to a URL within this domain.

- `Path`: Defines the URL path that must exist in the requested URL for the cookie to be sent. This allows cookies to be 
valid for specific parts of a website.

- `HttpOnly`: A flag that, when set, makes the cookie inaccessible to JavaScript (using `document.cookie`), helping mitigate 
certain types of attacks like XSS.

- `Secure`: A flag indicating that the cookie should only be sent over secure HTTPS connections.

- `Expires`: Determines the lifespan of the cookie. `Expires` is a specific date and time when the cookie will be deleted.

## Domain and Path
The browser sends a cookie to a given URL if the cookie’s `Domain` attribute is a domain-suffix of the URL domain, and the 
cookie’s `Path` attribute is a prefix of the URL path. 

For example, a cookie with `Domain=aritzia.com` and `Path=/stop/shopping` will be included on a request to 
`http://vanya.aritzia.com/stop/shopping/index.html`.

A malicious website `murderers.com` should not able to set a cookie with domain `betterment.com`, since this would allow 
an attacker to affect the functionality of the Betterment website. To prevent this, the cookie policy specifies that when 
a server (e.g. `murderers.com`) sets a cookie, the cookie’s `Domain` attribute must be a URL suffix of the server’s URL. 

A webpage with domain `vanya.rohatgi.edu` can set a cookie with domain `sumeet.rohatgi.edu` or `rohatgi.edu`, since the 
webpage domain ends in both of these domains.

Cookies cannot have domains set to a top-level domain, such as `.edu` or `.com`. However, the cookie policy allows a 
server to set the `Path` attribute without any restrictions.

## Special Cookies: Session Tokens
Let's think about the Gmail example from above. When I send a login request with my username and password, the server
will generate a new session token and send it to me as a cookie. In future requests, the browser will attach the session 
token cookie and send it to the server. The server maintains a mapping of session tokens to users, so when it receives a 
request with a session token cookie, it can look up the corresponding user (me) and customize its response accordingly.

Secure session tokens should be random and unpredictable, so an attacker cannot guess someone else’s session token and 
gain access to their account. 

## Attack!!
If a cookie is set for domain `vanya.rohatgi`, then `mean.vanya.rohatgi` and `angel.vanya.rohatgi` can both read and write 
to that cookie, even if they do not have the same origin. If an attacker controls `mean.vanya.rohatgi`, they can set a 
cookie for `vanya.rohatgi`, which will be sent to `angel.vanya.rohatgi` requests by the browser.