---
title: The Internet
subtitle: I try to explain the Internet in the simplest way I can. 
layout: default
date: 2024-12-17
keywords: networking
published: true
---

At Berkeley, one of the classes I was most excited to take was [CS 168](https://fa24.cs168.io/). Unfortunately, 
this course was not offered during my senior year. I am auditing it now, and these are some key takeaways from the 
Course Introduction!

# The Internet and the web are not the same thing. 
The Internet is simply the infrastructure that allows data to travel between computers across the world. 
On the other hand, the web is a collection of applications built on top of the Internet. 
An example of a web application is Wikipedia, which you can access via a web browser like Safari or Chrome.
Other applications are also built on top of Internet infrastructure, like your Apple Watch (Internet of Things devices)
and Steam games.

# The Internet is federated and scalable.
What does federated mean? There is no one Internet Service Provider (e.g. AWS, AT&T, etc.), or operator, that manages 
the billions of users and trillions of services across the world. Each ISP operates independently, but an ISP must 
cooperate with the shared Internet protocols. 

Due to this decentralization, the Internet is highly scalable. Since ISPs operate independently, they can use a wide 
range of technologies (e.g. electrical wires, optical fiber cables, etc.). Because of the billions of users and trillions
of services, it's important that Internet protocols operate asynchronously. When a client sends a server a message, the 
server can process the message at its own pace and respond when ready, without requiring the client to wait idly. The 
client can continue with other tasks or send additional requests while waiting for a response.

# Internet Protocols
A protocol specifies how applications can send and receive information over the Internet. It defines how the data should 
be formatted, and what the response to specific messages should be. 

The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) creates Request For Comments (RFC) documents. These documents define the 
standardized Internet protocols. 

# The Internet has 5 layers!
## Layer 1: Physical
We need to send data (bits) across space. We could accomplish that via wireless radio waves, light pulses across optical 
fiber cables, or voltages on an electrical wire. 

## Layer 2: Link
Simply put, a link connects two machines using any kind of technology (wireless, optical fiber, etc.).
Links that connect a bunch of computers that are close to one another create a Local Area Network (LAN).

## Layer 3: Internet
How do we connect a machine in one LAN to a machine in another LAN? We can add router(s), or switch(es) to each LAN. 
We can create links between routers to connect multiple LANs together! Using this framework, we could connect everyone 
in the world, and this is called the Internet.

Packets are groups of bytes. In Layer 2, we send packets across links within an LAN. In Layer 3, we can use routers to 
send packets anywhere in the Internet. The end hosts are the machines communicating over the Internet, and the routers
only exist to help the end hosts communicate with each other. 

Funnily enough, the Internet only supports best-effort delivery of data. When you send data over Layer 3, there is no 
guarantee that the data will be delivered. You also won't know whether or not the delivery succeeded. The data, if large,
will be sent as multiple packets, and each packet will be forwarded from the client to a router to (maybe) other routers,
until it finally reaches the server.

## Layer 4: Transport
Layer 4 implements a protocol for resending lost packets, splitting data into packets, and reordering packets that 
arrive out-of-order.

## Layer 7: Application
Why do we jump from Layer 4 to Layer 7? Layers 5 (Session) and 6 (Presentation), which were standardized in the 1970s, 
are now obsolete. Layer 7 is all about implementing the services on top of the Internet infrastructure.

# Headers 
When an end host send a packet to a router, how does the router know where to send the packet? When we send a packet, 
we need to attach additional metadata (i.e., a header) that tells the network infrastructure what to do with thd packet. 
The rest of the bits (e.g. the file being sent), or the original message, is called the payload.

Headers are standardized! They include information like the destination address for the data (required), the source 
address of the data, a checksum, and the length of the packet.

The lower 3 layers are implemented everywhere (end hosts and routers), but the top 2 layers are only implemented at the 
end hosts.

Let's say machine A wants to send a message to machine B. The message will be wrapped in a header by Layer 4, and then 
on top of that, it will be wrapped in a header by Layer 3, then Layer 2, then Layer 1. Layer 1 will send the wrapped 
packet over to the router. The router will unwrap the Layer 1 and 2 headers, and then use Layer 3 to determine where the
packet should be sent next. The router will add a new Layer 2 header and a new Layer 1 header. Let's say the packet 
should now be sent to machine B. Machine B will unwrap Layers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 7, and receive the message!

If you draw it out, you'll notice that you can use a different protocol for each hop at Layers 2 and 1. Each router 
parses Layers 1 through 3, while the end hosts parse Layers 1 through 7.

# The "Narrow Waist"
A Layer can have multiple protocols! For instance, Layer 7 could use NTP or HTTP. Layer 4 could use UDP or TCP. Layer 2 could use the Ethernet or WiFi. 
Layer 1 could use radio waves or copper wires. However, there is only one protocol allowed for Layer 3, and that is the 
Internet Protocol (IP). This is the "Narrow Waist."

Demultiplexing is the process of adding metadata to headers that provides information on which protocol or application 
to use.

# End-to-End Principle
The Internet implements best-effort delivery of packets across the routers. The end hosts then check whether the data
was fully delivered or not. If instead we relied on the network to be correct, we can’t actually guarantee perfect 
reliability if the routers are buggy (e.g. a router could report sending all packets successfully even if it dropped one).
The end hosts would probably end up doing an end-to-end check anyway.

This is the end-to-end principle in practice, which suggests certain functions, particularly those related to reliability
and correctness, should be implemented at the endpoints of a system rather than within the network itself.

# Statistically Multiplexing
Links and routers on the Internet have finite capacity. Network resources are statistically multiplexed, meaning that 
resources are dynamically allocated to users based on their demand, rather than partitioning a fixed share of resources 
to each user. Thus, we can support the same users with less capacity (cheaper, more efficient use of resources)! For 
many distributions, we can show that the peak of the aggregate is actually closer to the sum of the average demands, 
which is much less than the sum of the peak demands.

## Packet Switching vs. Circuit Switching
In packet switching, each packet is sent independently across the network, potentially taking different paths to reach 
the destination. Each router on the network routes packets based solely on their destination address without coordinating
with other routers, ensuring flexible and efficient data transmission.

In circuit switching (also a statistical multiplexing approach), on the other hand, a dedicated communication path is 
established between the source and destination before any data is transmitted. This path reserves the necessary network 
resources at each router along the way, ensuring a continuous and reliable connection for the duration of the data transfer.

Circuit switching gives the application better performance with reserved bandwidth. It also gives the developer 
more predictable behavior. However, packet switching gives us more efficient sharing of bandwidth (especially when the 
traffic is bursty), and avoids startup time. It also gives us easier recovery from failure, and is generally simpler to 
implement (less for routers to do).

Packet switching is the default statistical multiplexing approach in the Internet.

# Measuring the Performance of a Link
Bandwidth, propagation delay, and bandwidth-delay product (BDP) are key properties of a link, affecting how data is 
transmitted across it. Bandwidth is the data capacity per unit time, propagation delay is the time a bit takes to 
traverse the link, and BDP represents the data capacity at a given time.

The total packet delay includes transmission delay (time to put bits on the wire) and propagation delay, with queuing 
delay added if packets are buffered due to link congestion.

Choosing between links with different bandwidths and propagation delays depends on the packet size and type of data 
being sent. For small packets, propagation delay is often more critical, while for large packets, bandwidth becomes more 
important.

Transient overload occurs when packets arrive at a router faster than they can be sent out, but only for a brief period.
Persistent overload happens when the incoming traffic consistently exceeds the capacity of the outgoing link.
Transient overloads at routers are common and managed with queues, while persistent overloads may lead to packet loss, 
requiring proper network provisioning and congestion control strategies.





